WHAT'S WRONG WITH RENT?

Consider a simplified two-person economy, of people A and B. Each person needs to use an X regularly to get by, make a living, survive, etc. There are two X's. For whatever historical reasons, A currently owns both X's. But only one is of personal use to him. To get some benefit from the second one, he offers to trade B the use temporary of it in exchange for some labor (or the product thereof). In this manner, A can live a life of relative leisure off the labor of B <em>indefinitely</em>, simply by having come to own an extra X. B faces extraordinary challenges to acquiring his own X to escape this situation, because A can set the sale price of his extra X outside the affordability of B -- which he would do, for supply and demand, because why would he trade something which can provide him with a lifetime of income for anything less than a lifetime of income, which B could of course never in his life save up for, especially not while constantly paying A for the use of his second X, which B needs to continue his productive life. B is, in effect, permanently indebted to A; he is in many respects a serf or a slave to A.

In this two-person economy, he effectively is a slave, as he has nowhere else to turn, and is stuck beholden to the whims of A for the X he vitally needs. If instead there were a larger economy with a set of people in class A (who have more X's than they need) and another set of people in class B (who need more X's than they have), a member of class B could be more free than a slave if he had the ability to choose which member of class A he worked for in exchange for the use of an X. That would make him only a serf, sworn to a lord of his choosing. If further still the member of class B could work for one member of class A, and give the product of that labor paid to him to another member of class A, he would be as free as any worker in a capitalist economy -- but still stuck with the vestiges of slavery and serfdom in that he is still, in effect, perpetually indebted to some member of class A for the use of the X he vitally needs, with little hope of ever acquiring an X of his own and escaping this situation.

The imbalance of power is self-perpetuating, regardless of the merits of people in either class A or class B. Even if the imbalance was initially created because of some difference in merit, it doesn't require it to continue: someone can temporarily excel beyond the merits of others just enough to acquire an extra X and become a member of class A, and then rest contently indefinitely for so long as there is a class B people who need X's and have no choice but to serve indefinitely for the use of class A's extras, unless they can mount the Herculean effort to acquire an X of their own, while simultaneously working extra to secure the use of the X they need meanwhile -- a task far more difficult than that needed to enter class A from the neutral class of those who have an X of their own already. And if the initial imbalance is not because of any difference in merit, then one class of people is living leisurely off the labor of another for absolutely no justifiable reason at all.

ISN'T THAT AN INEVITABLE OUTCOME OF A FREE MARKET? WOULD YOU FORCIBLY REDISTRIBUTE WEALTH TO FIX IT?

No, I wouldn't forcibly redistribute, but I would remove the force which is inhibiting the natural redistribution that would ordinarily be occurring; remove the element which makes an imbalance of wealth self-perpetuating, and then let the rest sort itself out.

Consider instead -- back in our two-person model economy -- if somehow it weren't possible for A to trade the temporary use of his X. He would still have an extra X that was doing him no good, and he would still want to get some good out of it. Meanwhile, B would still need an X and be willing to work for it. The obvious solution would be for A to trade his extra X to B for something. But if B has nothing to trade but his labor, how is this situation any better than the preceding one? In this way: if A trades <em>his X</em> for labor, and not <em>the temporary use of his X</em>, then A may get a period of leisure at B's expense, but B gains an X of his own at A's expense in return, and then the two are even and both need to work equally to get by thenceforth. If the only way to profit from excess wealth is to sell it off, then imbalances of wealth will naturally disappear over time, <em>unless</em> some other force is propping them up. They will not self-perpetuate. And if proper civilization is in place to prevent theft and other violence from creating and perpetuating such imbalances illegitimately, the only things that could prop them up would be an ongoing string of differences in luck (extremely improbable and not something that anyone could be faulted with) or an ongoing difference in merit, which would justify the difference in wealth.

In other words, the only way someone could reliably stay wealthier than others in such a system would be to remain continually more productive than others. It would be an economy where wealth was almost always earned and deserved, almost never unearned or exploitative; and one in which any imbalances not created by merit were automatically corrected for over time unless merit perpetuated them. A world where productive work resulted in acquiring wealth, capital, ownership of your own, not just a stream of income to pay for the temporary use of someone else's capital in perpetuity; and that new wealth in turn resulted in reduced need for such income, and the labor to acquire it, once it was had. And conversely, it would be a world where living leisurely off the work of others came always at the cost of one's wealth, capital, and ownership, and so always eventually ended and required more productive work like everyone else was doing; a world where it was impossible to secure a perpetual free ride just by having enough wealth that it generated more wealth for no work.

YOU CAN'T INFRINGE ON PEOPLE'S PROPERTY RIGHTS LIKE THAT!

[insert bit here about how we could just ban rent, but that's not compatible with liberal/libertarian ideals -- but we could just not enforce contracts of it, which would not stop anyone from letting anyone use their property or paying anyone for the favor, but which would make it untenable as a large-scale economic arrangement between strangers. Compare and contrast left-libertarian/libertarian-socialist/anarcho-socialist complete absence of property rights; position between that and right-libertarianism/libertarian-capitalism/anarcho-capitalism]

[explain categorization of rights into claims/liberties/powers/immunities. explain what a world with maximal claims and no liberties would look like, making clear the value of liberty. explain what a world with maximal liberties and no claims would look like, making clear the value of some, limited, claims. explain what a world with maximal powers would look like, making clear the value of immunity. explain what a world with maximal immunities would look like, making clear the value of some, limited, powers. my contract-free market is a maximal-liberty/maximal-immunity world plus the minimal claim to property and the minimal power to trade]

BUT RENT IS USEFUL!

[insert bit here about how there is economic need for the short-term use of things, but how that can be arranged using only real sales -- sell high on long terms, buy back low on short terms -- in a way that makes longer-term "rentals" of this fashion gradually and automatically become less and less "rent"-like, so that when someone really wants something for their permanent use, it just looks like a slow sale, not like rent at all; but when someone wants something for brief temporary use and convenience, it looks a lot like traditional rent. Where rent is currently beneficial and non-exploitative, these rent-emulating arrangements will be profitable. They are basically rent with the changes that: if the "renter" "rent" long enough it becomes theirs and they don't have to pay anymore; the "renter" is in complete control of when the "rental" ends, so long as they keep paying; and the "renter" can sell or "rent" the property to anyone else in turn, though they are then on the hook to keep paying until they own it. Other justifications for why rentiers "deserve" their profits, such as maintenance and upkeep of their rental properties, can still be sold as those services straight up, and if they're really worth the money being made from them, people will pay it]

----------------------------------------------------------------

Some background on my position: freedom is awesome, authority is consequently bad, therefore free markets are awesome, but free markets have historically lead to great imbalances in wealth and thus power, and imbalances in power let those with more power claim or sway authority and thus undermine freedom. So the age old question is how can we preserve freedom without either imposing authority (to forcibly redistribute wealth) and thus undermining freedom ourselves, or else just letting freedom be undermined by the consequences that would "naturally" follow from not doing that? The mainstream debate seems to be between parties each claiming one of those two options respectively doesn't really sacrifice freedom but instead preserves it in a way that's more important than the other, but neither of those answers is satisfactory to me.

My basic position is distributivism, nicely summed up as "the problem with capitalism is not too many capitalists but too few". My objective is to see to it that the means of production and the basic capital goods necessary to live and support oneself are privately owned by the people who need to use them. A world where people own their own homes and businesses, or at least jointly own their homes and businesses if they live and work together with others. Distributivism historically hasn't really given any answers as to how to accomplish that though, it just says if we could maintain that, we could have free markets without any of the problems of capitalism.

I want to clarify that distinction here: by free markets I mean an economic system where all exchanges of goods and services are made voluntarily and without coercion. The kind of thing Adam Smith championed. By capitalism I mean, as Marx did when he coined the term, an economic system where those who own more capital than they need for their personal use can exploit their advantage over those who need more capital than they have to extract wealth from the latter at the latter's expense.

A naive examination of a toy model of a market superficially suggests that capitalism like that shouldn't really be possible long term in a free market, and that distributivism should occur naturally in a free market, because those who have more wealth than they can personally use can only benefit from it by trading it to someone (who, wanting it, would naturally have less than them) in exchange for something that is useful, like the labor they'd otherwise have to do to get the things they need to live. So, naively, we'd expect the rich to buy leisure in exchange for their wealth, and the poor to accrue wealth from their labor, and any wealth inequality would naturally and gradually level out over time.

Many proponents of free markets claim that something like that is what really would happen if we would just get rid of all authoritative intervention in the market and let it be actually free, but history from periods when there was less authoritarian intervention in markets shows that that's not really true, and that having more wealth somehow makes it progressively easier to not only generate new wealth (which is fine and good) but to extract wealth from those who have less, and conversely (the real problem) having insufficient wealth puts you somehow the mercy of those who have more than you and makes it incredibly difficult to actually accumulate wealth despite all the hard labor you might put into doing so and despite all the wealth that labor might generate for the economy as a whole.

The question then is why does that happen? Marx's analysis of the problem is largely in terms of employer-employee relations and how the employee is at a weaker bargaining position than the employer and can thus be exploited, but I think that's looking at the wrong end of the problem. I think the source of the problem is not who the poor get their money from, but who they pay it to (and thus why they always need it so desperately and are at a weaker bargaining position to get it): their landlords and creditors. Because the poor don't have basic capital goods they need just to live (like housing), can't afford to buy them without saving immensely for long periods of time, but need them immediately and can't wait that time, they have to borrow them from those who have more of them than they need for their own use. If that borrowing can then be done for a price, those who have more than they need can perpetually extract wealth from those who need more than they have without losing anything in the process, and conversely those who need more than they have pay perpetually without ever acquiring anything in the process.

On the whole, this takes the naive picture from above where the rich trade capital to the poor for labor, and turns it into a scenario where the rich lend capital to the poor for labor (masked by an intermediate step where they pay them for their labor, then charge them for the use of the capital), so the rich never actually lose the capital, the poor never gain it, and the naturally equalizing center-ward class movement never happens, instead an anti-centerward pressure occurs where the rich get richer and the poor get poorer. All because of rent, including especially housing rent, and rent on money, otherwise known as interest.

So getting rid of rent would solve that problem. But the whole point in the end is preserving freedom, so isn't authoritatively banning rental agreements just falling back on one of the two options I said at the outset were unsatisfactory? It would be, which is why I'm not suggesting that. The trick here is that key word agreements. Rent is only tenable as a widespread economic institution if a contract can be written and enforced requiring one party to transfer their property (money) and another party to permit the use of their property (the thing being rented). If we simply did not enforce such contracts, and kept on enforcing the usual laws against violence and aggression so that no party could enforce such contracts themselves, then such arrangements would just not be tenable between strangers on a wide scale. Anyone would be free to allow anyone to use their property as they liked, and to give anyone money as they liked, but you couldn't create binding obligations to do so: the other party could fail to live up to their end and get off scot-free, so nobody would rely on such agreements with untrustworthy strangers as an important economic institution.

Extending the sense of the term "usury" beyond its current meaning of "egregious interest" back to its medieval sense of "any interest" and then to its even broader etymological sense of "a fee for use" (i.e. any kind of rent), I like to call a free market without contracts of rent or interest as described above a "usury free market", that being a bit of multiword portmanteau of sorts combining "usury-free" and "free-market".

Thus far I've been arguing this from a consequentialist point of view. I also have a deontological argument that starts here and works backward, beginning with the principle that deontic relations like obligations and permissions cannot be created by fiat or even by mutual agreement, but that who has what obligations and permissions follows directly from who owns what, and so the only way to change such deontic relations is to exchange property, so all contracts except for simple straightforward sales are invalid. I've got a lot of thoughts on how many good and necessary service transactions could be constructed as technically exchanges of ownership and thus preserved, but I don't have all the answers on this point yet, so for now let's set this aside and just run with the consequentialist argument preceding: not enforcing rental contracts would be good because it would prevent exploitative capitalism from arising in otherwise free markets without requiring authoritarian intervention in them, which we've presupposed is a good consequence.

So now the big questions that usually upset everyone are how the hell would anything work in a world without rent or interest.

Let's look first at the case of people who need permanent and immediate use of a big-ticket item they can't afford to buy up front and would otherwise be stuck renting, because this is the most important case I'm concerned with. Let's use housing at the item in question for our example since, again, that's my biggest concern; but this could also apply to cars or expensive tools or anything else in the category of "expensive things I need right now and indefinitely just to make a living, so can't wait to save up for, but also can't afford to buy all at once".

Once rent is no longer a viable option, everyone who owns rental properties they had been renting out will suddenly have useless property on their hands that they can't profit from the way they had been, and everyone who had been renting will suddenly be in the market to buy. An aside before I continue: This "suddenly" part is actually a problem, and I wouldn't abolish rent in one fell swoop like that, specifically to avoid that problem. I would instead, using the existing authoritarian structure of the state since it's there already, gradually raise taxes on income from rent and offer tax credits to people who pay rent, until for tax reasons rental gradually becomes unviable as a source of profit; then switch to just not enforcing the contracts, and the taxes and credits go away too because the thing they applied to is gone. That would more slowly and manageably push a transition to the alternate arrangements below, instead of having a disruptive sudden transition period where you've got a bunch of homeless people and empty houses until everyone figures out how to puts two and two together about that problem.

So you've got former landlords looking to sell and former renters looking to buy. A bunch of other parties who otherwise would have been in the market to buy, namely "investors" who wanted to acquire rental properties to milk as free money machines, would no longer be in the market, because their reason for being in it would be gone. The only people looking to buy housing would be people who don't own housing of their own already, the same people who had previously been renting. The property owners are still at a stronger bargaining position here, but not nearly as strong as they were before; the only way they can benefit from their extra capital now is to sell it, and the only people looking to buy it can only afford it on reasonable terms, meaning either lower prices, or longer payment options. Sellers would have to offer a variety of terms and prices, on a scale from shorter terms and lower prices to longer terms and higher prices. In the end, you would wind up with most of the people who were already paying everything they could afford every month paying similar amounts every month for similar housing, but with some important differences. Firstly, they would be acquiring equity in the property, and eventually they would finish paying it off. Just as importantly, the seller wouldn't be able to kick them out (such as to bring in new tenants at higher rents), because the buyer would be the new owner, and simply be indebted to the seller (but a finite amount, in contrast to the infinite debt of rent).

The buyer would not be stuck there until he finished paying it off, however, because he could sell the property. However, because the market would be structured such that shorter payment terms (such as full payment up front) demand lower prices to compensate, the first buyer wouldn't be able to just buy on long terms, sell on short terms, make a ton of profit and be set for life. Selling on short terms would cost him a lot. So he would have to sell on long terms to another person in a similar situation to the one he was in, meaning that if he's moving to a similarly priced home elsewhere and can only afford similar terms on it, and still in debt to the original seller, the second buyer would basically be finishing paying off the first buyer's debt for him (not directly; the first buyer would still have to collect and pass along the money from the second buyer to the original seller), while the first buyer started paying off the new place still out of his own pocket. However, after the first buyer's original debt is finally paid off, the second buyer is still paying the first buyer off, so the first buyer suddenly starts getting back the money that he had spent on the first place, and can apply it to paying off the rest of his new place more quickly.

This is only really manageable if you're living somewhere permanently though, and rarely move. If you just want to live somewhere for a short period of time and don't want to deal with all this buying and selling and ongoing debts canceling out and you're fine with the cost of renting as we do it now for the convenience of not dealing with that, I can understand that. Thankfully, under my system, you would be able to buy that convenience still. The same people who currently make a living renting out properties could make a living by selling on long terms at high prices and buying back on short terms at low prices. So you, the would-be renter who wants to get in somewhere quickly and not pay much money and then get out quickly, and who's ok with losing money in the whole deal for the sake of that convenience, can start making your small rent-like payments on the long-and-high deal you buy under, and then when you want to get out, sell back to the same vendor on a short-and-low deal such that his new debt to you cancels out your debt to him, you're even, and you go along your merry way.

You could even sell back to a different vendor if for some reason you wanted to, and get someone else (like a bank maybe) to take your debts owed and due off your hands and handle passing the money along for you, though probably at a cost to you. If you're also concerned with maintenance costs and property value fluctuations, you could buy service contracts and insurance and things like that to mitigate those concerns, for a cost again. The same people doing the buy-high-and-long/sell-low-and-short deal (i.e. the people who would be landlords today) can even offer those same services, since those are supposedly "services" landlords provide today. If the convenience and lack of worry from all of that is what supposedly justifies the cost of rental currently, then the cost of all of that should be roughly equal to the cost of rental, and you can get the same deal if you really like it.

But people who don't like that deal, who would rather be happy to do their own maintenance, risk property value fluctuation, and find a new buyer if they eventually want to move, because they just want to own a place to live somewhere permanently and don't want to be stuck in a situation where the only deal available to them is all of that stuff that's not worth the price to them, then they could just take the long-term high-price deal by itself, never sell it back or buy any of the extra services, and be well on their way to homeownership in a way that most people currently in that situation are barred from, the way we do things now.

That same buy-high-and-long/sell-low-and-short business model is how rental of items that are genuinely just wanted for temporary use would be handled as well. Want to rent a movie, or a power tool, or a bicycle, or a kayak, or any of the other things people really just want for a short time? You could still "rent" them, just when you're "checking them out" you'd actually be buying on long terms at a higher price, and when you "returned" them you'd be selling them back on short terms at a lower price and canceling your remaining debt. You could, if you liked, "return" (sell) them to someone else instead, if they were willing to buy. You might even be able to get a better deal and save some money doing enough legwork to find the right buyer. But that would be horribly inconvenient and you really just wanted a carpet cleaner for one afternoon and the money you lose in the deal is worth that inconvenience so you don't bother. Provided that is that the money lost in the deal really is worth the saved inconvenience, meaning that the profit to be made by people "renting" out small items like that would be driven down to the cost of the actual convenience they provide.

I think that's pretty much all the points that usually get covered in these debates, but if I forgot something or you have a new question or observation do let me know. Thanks.