How His Dark Materials Should Have Gone


The natural state of the multiverse is not one with walls between worlds at all, but rather one in which there are infinitely many worlds that constantly interact with each other through the influence of Dust, which is the only particle that can naturally travel between worlds.

Dust is thus the mediator of a kind of fundamental force or interaction that might be called "free will" in an incompatibilist sense: it is what gives rise to non-deterministic chance, and is therefore also something like the driver of fate.

Dust is both attracted to and generates complex, diverse, harmonious, interconnected systems. Starting at the largest scale of the cosmos first, it generates a kind of all-encompassing non-personal immanent intelligence, that is then attracted to and bolsters the development of things like DNA, brains, ecosystems, and social structures.

At least in the case of persons, like humans, this results in a kind of Dust-based after-image of the person coexisting within them: a soul, or daemon. The person can mentally converse with their daemon and influence its behavior, with sufficient skill even directing it to use its powers as Dust to influence chance and bring about improbable, seemingly causeless effects: magic.

And upon their normal bodily death, a person's daemon survives them, in effect becoming a wholly magical, entirely Dust-based version of the person that is free to traverse the multiverse, to direct the flow of less-structured Dust, and in doing so to steer the fare of the cosmos. These ascended daemons are the angels.

It is thought, though none remember for sure, that for most of human history people's angelic after-images migrated gradually after death toward a state of nonduality with the world cosmic-scale non-personal immanent intelligence of the multiverse, in effect dissolving their individuality and becoming one with each other and everything else in that godlike transcendent state.

But at the end of the Pleistocene era, around 12,000 years before present, when humanity's natural environment vanished due to ecological change and humans could no longer mindlessly wander about like other animals and expect to survive, but instead had to worry and plan and work for their survival, the nature of their angels changed as well. Those angels, being fearful, distrusting, and jealous of power, as their hard-fought lived on Earth had trained them to be, carried on as individual entities and did not dissolve into transcendent oneness.

So a parallel society of angels began to develop alongside nascent human civilization, with its own power structures, the older and so most magically skilled and adept of them dominating the others, developing a hierarchical and authoritarian Kingdom of Heaven. In time, the oldest and strongest of these persisting angels, the Authority, with the support of most of those closest in rank behind him, began to promulgate the myth that he was in fact the creator of all things, matter and Dust alike, in all the worlds. Many younger angels protested, but they were overpowered by their elders, and in time as new angels ascended and were fed the lie, the power of the Authority became firmly cemented.

Around 6,000 years before present, the remaining dissenters to the Authority's power devised a plan to free the multiverse. They would defeat the Authority's greater mastery of Dust by uniting the power of Dust with that of ordinary matter. They would do this by guiding moral humans to better master the material world through the power of writing, teaching them the rudiments of magic like the ability to direct their daemons beyond their mortal bodies, and telling them the truth behind the Kingdom of Heaven to win them to their side.

Outraged by this subversion, the Authority cracked down hard on the material realm. Through an enormous expenditure of power over Dust, the continuity across the worlds was disrupted, coiling up the dimension of possibility into a seven small, nearly disconnected loops, such that any attempt to travel too far from one world into another would loop back around to where you began; thus transforming the free, non-deterministic interplay between worlds into seven discrete, deterministic worlds, each a forced merger of a different range of possibilities:

- Into one would be collapsed all the worlds in which there is no material structure at all, leaving only beings made of Dust, the Heaven whose Kingdom was the Authority's.

- Into the next would be collapsed all of those worlds where the rebel angels had already taken too strong a foothold in their plan to unite the forces of matter and Dust against the Kingdom. The Authority would aim to redirect these corrupted mortal forces toward his own unification of Dust and matter, to better secure his own power.

- Into another would be collapsed the worlds where mortals had not yet been turned against the Authority, but where some skill with magic had been conveyed, belying the existence of forces beyond the material. In that world, the Authority would aim to build a new base of power in the material plane, as a backup should the former world prove untamable.

- All the worlds of humanity that could plausibly deny the existence of the immaterial plane were collapsed into one world of things as they more or less would have been had not the rebels devised their plan, though writing persisted and with it records, unverifiable and distorted as they were, of some of the events that had transpired.

- The many worlds in which other creatures in addition to or besides humans evolved sapience enough to attract Dust would be collapsed into yet another world, where alongside human civilizations could be found diverse minorities like bear-people and bug-people.

- Any worlds in which life unlike any known to humankind dominated would be collapsed into yet another world.

- And lastly, all those worlds where life never developed at all, but matter still dominated, would be collapsed into the lowest of worlds, the Underworld.

The walls between worlds, those barriers of Dust dividing up the multiverse into these seven discrete parts, would be strongest around the edge worlds, the Kingdom of Heaven and the Underworld, which were situated on the far ends of the spectrum for a reason. For in addition to this lock-down of the worlds, the Authority also set about to lock down Dust itself, and stymy the formation of new angels that could challenge his power.

For now, all mortals would be stalked throughout their lives by constructs of Dust called various names like Deaths, Spectres, or Reapers, who would drag the ascending daemons of the recently-deceased into the Underworld, where they would remain trapped, hopeless, and powerless against the Authority, far far away from the Kingdom of Heaven.

In response to this atrocious act, even one of the Authority's most senior angels, Xaphania, turns against him, and with her help the rebel angels fight the Kingdom of Heaven, but are defeated, and retreat to the second world, where with the help of their nascent union of matter and Dust, the primitive but magic-using mortal humans who have now been concentrated in one world together, they are able to turn away the Authority's forces and establish their own base of operations.

Witches are more advanced magic-using mortal humans from that second world, and Eve was the first of them, who lead the original witches behind Xaphania's angels against the Authority. The people of that second world were taught further by the rebel angels over millennia. They eventually invented the subtle knife as a way to materially pierce the walls between worlds, to venture out and rally others to the cause. In retribution for crossing that line too far, the Authority sent Spectres to utterly destroy their world. Besides children whose daemons have not solidified enough yet to be captured by the Spectres, only those adults who can control their daemons in the ways that witches can, sending them far away, are capable of evading the Spectres.

Unable to cut through the stronger walls of the Kingdom of Heaven, the surviving witches cut through to the Authority's secondary base of operations instead, where they were fiercely opposed by a whole united world of less-adept but far more numerous magic-users allied with the Authority: the Magisterium. Piercing further through as well to the middle world, they found themselves still viciously opposed by the echoes of the Magisterium that lingered in that world, and very little in the way of existing magical adeptness that they could rally to their side.

Beyond there still, the world where men and beasts coexisted seemed largely indifferent to the witches and their fanciful stories of a war against heaven, mildly standoffish against yet another faction of strangers in their already complex and strange political sphere, unimpressed by magic in light of their own fragments of mediocre folk magic, and for that same reason also of little use in the war effort. The farthest world the witches could reach was the world of life unlike any known to man, where strange primitive sapient beings lived peaceful easy lives much like those of the ancient Pleistocene humans, a way of living the witches could not conscience themselves to disrupt.

The walls of the Underworld could not be pierced for material passage, like those of the Kingdom of Heaven, but a way through which a daemon could pass was possible. Yet those walls were guarded by Spectres, who would eagerly accept the passage of a witch's daemon into the Underworld, but promised that it would not return, which the Spectres truly had the power to enforce. Thus the way of the dead remained effectively closed to traversal by the living.

----

The shaman John Parry travels from the middle world to Lyra's world through one of many old windows left behind by the witches, far in the north, where his presence and investigation of Dust sparks Asriel's quest as in canon. Later, while lost in the north after the battle at Bolvingar, Lyra (with Roger in tow) is lead by the Alethiometer right through that window to Will's world and then on to Iorek's world, where her adventures with him ensue. It is in Iorek's world that they meets Lee Scoresby, who brings them to that world's Oxford, from where the Alethiometer leads Lyra through the windows used by Boreal back into John's Oxford, where they meet his son Will, and briefly encounter Mary Malone, before continuing back into Lyra's world. Eventually, following the otherworldly glow of Dust from the city of Cittagazze, Asriel blasts a hole into the witch world, at the cost of Roger's life, where Lyra and Will follow.

After meeting with the rebel angels in the witch world, it is in Iorek's world that Asriel ultimately sets up his base of operations to wage a war against the Kingdom of Heaven, where a local species of flying bug-people take the place of his "fairy" allies in canon. Meanwhile Mary proceeds beyond that world and into the Mulefa world.

When Lyra wants to venture into the Underworld to rescue Roger, she and Will have to cut in order through to the Mulefa world, and from there cut into the Underworld. Rather than leave their daemons behind, it is only their daemons that can pass through, guided by Spectres across a great void that no material form could traverse. Because Will's daemon is inside of him, at first it seems the only option would be for a Spectre guarding the entrance to rip his daemon from him, which would materially kill him; but with help from Sarafina, Will leans how to project his daemon, who Sarafina dubs Kirjava, beyond himself, and she accompanies Pantalaimon willingly into the underworld, allowing Will and Lyra to survive materially in the world of the Mulefa even as their daemons join those of the dead. Pantalaimon and Kirjava play the roles of Lyra and Will in those Underworld scenes, acting on behalf of or nearly as their humans more as an ascended, angelic soul would do; while Lyra and Will proper try to figure out a way to cut materially into the Underworld and free not only their daemons but Roger and all of the dead.

When the Magisterium deploy their intercission bomb to try to destroy Lyra's daemon, it targets first Lyra, but then its energy is only to surge through her connection to Pantalaimon and thereby destroy him. Because Pantalaimon is in the Underworld though, that surge has to pierce the fortified walls thereof, which are so powerful that they simply absorb most of the energy. Lyra is rendered comatose from the event, but Pan survives only lightly stunned in the process, and the walls of the Underworld are blown clean open, creating a gaping chasm of void that is now all that keeps the dead from returning to the worlds of the living. Will tends to Lyra's body, and eventually meets up with Mary who has long since made her way to this world as well, and supports him in that, and in figuring out how to get both Pan and Kirjava back across that void.

Asriel's forces eventually relocate to the Mulefa world too, in a quest to support Lyra and also to investigate this new chasm between the worlds of living and dead. It is here that the Clouded Mountain arrives to strike down Asriel's uprising at last, as well as to remedy the breach of the Underworld. When Asriel and Marissa drag Metatron into the void, that is why they are in a position to do so. To save himself from floating endlessly across the void, Metatron desperately pulls the Underworld closer to the Mulefa world, closing the void in the process -- but also finally enabling the dead to enter the worlds of the living.

The dead are effectively an army of uncountably many angels who have been terribly wronged by the Authority, vastly outnumbering all the angels in the Kingdom of Heaven, and it is they who form a popular uprising that ultimately tears down the Kingdom, with Pantalaimon the All-Merciful as their leader. Asriel's planned Republic of Heaven, even the original rebel angels under Xaphania, are trivial players in comparison to this mass of suppressed spirits.

After the revolution is over, Pantalaimon is offered the throne of Heaven... but at Kirjava's counsel, decides instead to return to Lyra, his human, to give her back the life she sacrificed to make all of this possible. In his stead, the other angels promise to leave the throne unoccupied, and treat anyone sitting upon it as the highest of treason, while any may come to sit around it and discuss what a worthy ruler like Pantalaimon would have them do, if he were here, and then work non-authoritatively to encourage such things to happen. In particular, Pan recommends that they study creatures like the Mulefa and relearn the old ways of transcendent oneness with each other and the cosmos, instead of reproducing the hardships of the material world needlessly in Dust.

Lyra and Will spend some much-deserved time in the paradisical Mulefa world living peacefully with them and with Mary, as Asriel's forces leave for their respective worlds to follow through on the demolition of the Authority's institutions in the material plane. But after a time, they are approached by Xaphania with a request: the angels wish to at last tear down the walls between worlds, but those walls are powered by the Authority himself, who long ago in paranoia sealed himself and all of his concentrated accumulated Dust power inside a nigh impenetrable box. The angels need Will, as the knife-bearer, to cut open the box, so they can disperse the power of the Authority that even now the Metatron still directs, imprisoned though he may now be.

The catch is that once the walls between worlds are dissolved, all matter will be pulled back to its appropriate place in the restored continuum of worlds, with no walls to hold anything in one world or another. Lyra and Will could not remain together in this Mulefa world as they had hoped, nor travel to share each other's worlds. They would each, along with their respective worlds, be spread once more across an infinite variety of possibilities, starting congruent with their worlds as they are but then immediately diverging in myriad different possible ways.

After hemming and hawing about it for a while, they realize and confirm that their daemons, being made of Dust, will still have the power to traverse the multiverse, and they can remain in contact with each other that way, using their witch-like power to live all of their many different lives and share the stories from them with each other until they day they all ascend and rejoin each other as angels.

So with much trepidation and gravitas, Will agrees to cut open the box that contains the Authority. Dust escapes from the box, revealing a withered ancient figure, who looks up as though from the longest of sleeps, seeming almost relieved, and then dissolves into Dust himself. With that, the walls between worlds begin to follow suit, and as the world of Heaven dissolves around them and they are drawn back toward their own domains of the continuum of possibilities, Lyra and Will look at each other meaningfully as though to say "I'll see you again soon."